apps/execution/README.md, before:

# Execution Service

Internal MCP server for virtual file system management and time-travel debugging.

## Overview

The Execution Service is an **internal** MCP server used by the [Control Service](../control/README.md) to orchestrate file operations. It provides tools for reading files, applying patches, and retrieving historical file snapshots from the virtual file system.

> **Note:** This is not the MCP server that AI agents connect to directly. For AI agent integration, see [apps/mcp](../mcp/README.md).

## How It Fits

```
AI Agent (Claude Code)
    │
    ▼
Control Service ──MCP──▶ Execution Service
    │                         │
    │                         ├── read_file
    │                         ├── apply_patch
    │                         └── list_files_at_time
    │
    └──MCP──▶ Engram MCP Server (apps/mcp)
                   │
                   ├── remember
                   ├── recall
                   └── query
```

The Control Service uses Execution for VFS operations while the agent uses the main MCP server for memory operations.

## MCP Tools

| Tool | Description |
|:-----|:------------|
| `read_file` | Read file content from the virtual file system |
| `apply_patch` | Apply a unified diff patch to a file |
| `list_files_at_time` | List files at a specific point in time |

## Responsibilities

- Manage VirtualFileSystem in-memory state
- Handle unified diff patch application via PatchManager
- Support temporal queries for historical file state
- Persist session state to FalkorDB via Rehydrator

## Dependencies

- `@engram/temporal` - Rehydrator, TimeTravelService
- `@engram/vfs` - VirtualFileSystem, PatchManager
- `@engram/storage` - FalkorDB graph client
- `@modelcontextprotocol/sdk` - MCP server framework

## Transport

Stdio (MCP standard)

## Development

```bash
# From monorepo root
npm run dev --filter=@engram/execution

# Or from this directory
npm run dev
```

## Integration

This service is designed to be called by AI agents through the MCP protocol. It integrates with the Memory Service for persisting file system state and the Temporal package for time-travel capabilities.

Commit message:

refactor(control): merge ExecutionService into Control, remove MCP dependency
- Create ExecutionService class in apps/control/src/execution/ with
  VFS, PatchManager, and TimeTravelService integration
- Add ToolRouter that unifies execution tools (direct) and MCP tools
- Update DecisionEngine and SessionManager to use ToolAdapter interface
- Deprecate apps/execution standalone MCP server
- Keep Wassette as placeholder for future external MCP tools

This eliminates the non-idiomatic use of MCP for internal service
communication, reducing process overhead and simplifying architecture.

All 172 tests pass.

apps/execution/README.md, after:

# Execution Service

> **DEPRECATED**: This standalone MCP server has been merged into the [Control Service](../control/README.md).
> The functionality is now available via `ExecutionService` in `apps/control/src/execution/`.
> This app is kept for backward compatibility but will be removed in a future release.

## Migration

The execution tools (`read_file`, `apply_patch`, `list_files_at_time`) are now integrated directly into the Control Service via `ToolRouter`:

```typescript
import { ExecutionService } from "./execution";
import { ToolRouter } from "./tools/router";

const executionService = new ExecutionService({ graphClient: falkor });
const toolRouter = new ToolRouter(executionService, mcpAdapter);
```

## Why Was This Changed?

Using MCP for internal service-to-service communication was not idiomatic. MCP is designed for AI-to-tool interfaces, not internal RPC. By merging ExecutionService directly into Control:

- Eliminates unnecessary process overhead (no subprocess for VFS operations)
- Removes stdio serialization latency
- Simplifies architecture
- Maintains the same API through `ToolRouter`

## MCP Tools

| Tool | Description |
|:-----|:------------|
| `read_file` | Read file content from the virtual file system |
| `apply_patch` | Apply a unified diff patch to a file |
| `list_files_at_time` | List files at a specific point in time |

## Responsibilities

- Manage VirtualFileSystem in-memory state
- Handle unified diff patch application via PatchManager
- Support temporal queries for historical file state
- Persist session state to FalkorDB via Rehydrator

## Dependencies

- `@engram/temporal` - Rehydrator, TimeTravelService
- `@engram/vfs` - VirtualFileSystem, PatchManager
- `@engram/storage` - FalkorDB graph client
- `@modelcontextprotocol/sdk` - MCP server framework

## Transport

Stdio (MCP standard)

## Development

```bash
# From monorepo root
npm run dev --filter=@engram/execution

# Or from this directory
npm run dev
```

## Integration

This service is designed to be called by AI agents through the MCP protocol. It integrates with the Memory Service for persisting file system state and the Temporal package for time-travel capabilities.
